# Better than open source contributions

## Intro

Hello, I'm Chris Krycho, and this is the New Rustacean podcast---a show about learning the Rust programming language.
This is *Bonus Episode 5: Better Than Open Source Contributions*.

## News and Follow-up

First, a quick explanation on the delay of this episode: we had a family health emergency come up---the kind that
landed a family member in the hospital for several days---so recording this obviously took a lower priority. Podcasts
are good and Rust is great, but family is far, *far more important*. As you'll see in a minute, that's actually
especially fitting given the content of this particular bonus episode.

One of the big highlights for me in the last couple weeks is the announcement of the open-source Xi editor project,
which aims to be a performant, extensible editor with a Rust text engine backing it and native interfaces in Cocoa and
eventually .NET, GTK, etc. This is incredibly interesting to me for a variety of reasons, some them algorithmic (like
the fascinating *ropes* algorithm he's using to implement the text engine; and others architectural, like the planned
structure for linking the front and back ends; and of course some simply Rustic: this is *exactly* the kind of thing
I've long had in mind to use Rust for, and the reason I started learning it in the first place. I'll link the project
in the show notes, and you should definitely keep an eye on it.

One other thing to check out: for Rust's 1.0's one-year birthday, the Rust team launched a community survey. I've
linked it in the show notes, so go fill it out!

## Open source

Now, for today's topic. Over the last few years, I've often seen the suggestion that you need to be actively involved
with open source software for the sake of your career. Last week, I saw someone say flat-out that he won't hire someone
who doesn't do a bunch of open-source work in their spare time.

This is, in a word, *nonsense*.

To start with, I don't really buy the argument that it's somehow a mark of a good developer. I've had several jobs
where it wouldn't have been remotely relevant---and for the job I have now, which is an absolute dream in many ways, I
don't have any reason to believe the meager open source contributions I *had* made impacted the hiring decision
whatsoever. And that's as it should be, because I think it would actually be a disaster if most companies started
treating open-source contributions as a major component of a hiring decision. Or, for that matter, *any* component, for
the vast majority of jobs. (The only exception is a job where you're being hired to work *on* open-source. But those
are pretty rare.)

Why does this even come up? Well, employers tend to care about open-source contributions on your resume for a couple
reasons.

1. **They see it as a way to evaluate your code quality.** This is a reasonable desire, but there are lots of ways to
  do this which don't involve requiring open source work. One of my favorites, an idea o picked up from The Frontside,
  is for a company to hire you at their standard consulting rate for a day and just work with you directly. This gives
  you a good feel for the company, gives the people at the company a good feel for where your skills really are and how
  you work with a team, and---incredibly importantly---doesn't ask you to do something for free to prove your value as
  an employee.
2. **They see it as a sign that you're the kind of employee they want to hire, because they want people who do a lot of
  programming outside of work.** From companies like this, just run away. Basically, this means two things about the
  company in question: 1. They do not value anything about you except your programming interest. As I'll come back to
  in a minute, this is a profoundly misguided view of what makes for a healthy employee---because it's a profoundly
  misguided view of what makes a healthy *human*. 2. It drives the company toward a monoculture, and means it will miss
  out on a lot of other wake vey qualified and talented people, whose input and perspectives will be enormously
  enriching. While diversity can become a sort of totem, something people chase for its own sake, I think a wide
  variety of perspectives really is quite good for the work we all do. More than that, though: do you really want to
  work at (or be) the kind of company that turns down a programmer just because she's a mom who thinks spending time
  helping her kids with their homework in the evening is more valuable than doing open source software? Or because he's
  a son whose parents are ill and he takes care of them? Or because she's spending nights and evenings investing in
  community theater? Or any number of other legitimate, healthy, human reasons people have to do something besides
  *code* in their spare time?

Don't get me wrong. I like doing software work for fun. I make a podcast about a programming language, for goodness'
sake. But demanding that everyone fit that mold is incredibly shortsighted; it will make you build a pretty terrible
company culture filled with people who are just clones of you. And it inherently devalues everything else. At the end
of the day, you don't want to work for a company that's incapable of seeing things besides software as valuable. If
"you must do open source" is one of their prerequisites, keep applying for other software jobs. There are more than
enough to go around.

But let's take this one step further: even the "we want you to have other hobbies" line you sometimes hear can be a
problem. Some companies want you to have outside activities and not sell yourself to the job for reasons that are
still, at the end of the day, purely mercenary. It's increasingly well-known that people are more productive on the job
when they have healthy personal lives, so it's understandable that well-informed companies are starting to value that.
But I think that, while that shift is good in one way, in too many cases it still comes down to a commoditization of
people. In a way, it's worse than the more directly exploitative practices it replaces: it says that families and
non-work hobbies are valuable not because they're good, essential parts of human existence as it is supposed to be, but
merely as more means to the end of profit. And human beings and human relationships are not means, but ends in and of
themselves. When we turn people's entire lives and all their loves into nothing more than another way to maximize
productivity and profit, we have gotten things completely backwards.

Now of course it *does* help, but that's because people are meant for more than work! We are not meant for less: work
is good. Programming is good. Creating things and putting them into the world is good. But those things aren't
everything, and we should never, *ever* make everything about them.

Don't get me wrong. I'm grateful that my employer is quite serious about people taking care of their families and
leaving work at work. And if you're running a business or managing a product team, you will probably find that people
do give you better work when you encourage them to do things besides programming. But don't make the mistake of
reducing people to levers for profit. And if you're an employee, don't make the mistake of letting someone demand that
you make your life about the job---not directly and not indirectly. Be okay interrogating the way companies think as
well as what they do, because *it matters*. It *really* matters. The best kinds of companies want you to spend time
with your family and have things you're passionate about outside of work not just because it's good business, but
because it's simply *good*.

## Closing

In some ways, as much as I love talking about Rust---and as happy as I'll be to hop back into that next time---I think
it's worth stopping to say things like this. Thanks for listening, and if you found this episode helpful, do please
share it with friends or colleagues.

### Sponsors

Thanks to Chris Palmer, Hamza Sheikh, Daniel Collin, and Vesa Khailavirta for sponsoring the show this month! You can
see a full list of sponsors in the show notes.

If you're interested in sponsoring the show, you can set up recurring contributions at Patreon.com/newrustacean, or
one-off contributions at Venmo, Dwolla, cash.me, or Flatttr---or get in touch with me directly.

### Follow/support

You can find links to everything I mentioned at NewRustacean.com. You can also follow the show on Twitter
@newrustacean, or follow me there @chriskrycho. You can help *others* find the show by rating and reviewing it on
iTunes, recommending it in another podcast directory, tweeting about it, or just telling a friend!

So do respond on social media, in the thread for the episode on the Rust user forum at users.rust-lang.org, or via
email at hello@newrustacean.com.

Until next time, happy coding!
