# Composing a Rustic tune

## Intro (30s)

Hello, I'm Chris Krycho, and this is the New Rustacean podcast---a 15--20 minute show about learning the Rust
programming language. This is *Episode 9: Composing a Rustic tune*.

## News (2m 30s -> 3m)

Things have been a bit quiet the last couple weeks---the holidays will do that! There are a couple tidbits of note,
however.

Nick Cameron, one of the Rust core developers, wrote an interesting blog post called "My Thoughts on Rust in 2016,"
which I'll link in the show-notes. It's thoughts and guesses, not promises, but it still makes for interesting reading.

The one other pretty big piece of news, though it's a fair ways out yet, is a pair of breaking changes in the language
coming in the 1.7 release. Both of the changes have to do with details in the type system which we haven't even talked
about on the show yet, and both of the changes *improve* Rust's type system to make it more robust. One of these
changes started issue warnings in 1.4 back in October 2015, and will become compile errors when Rust 1.7 comes out on
March 3. The other will become warnings with 1.7 and errors at some later point.

One of the neat things about this is how the Rust team has been able to tell before making the change how many packages
will be affected by it and in fact to inform the package developers (and people who depend on them) of the issues. This
all falls out of the tooling they've built over the last year, especially a tool called Crater which runs the compiler
over every package uploaded to crates.io and sees what breaks with any given set of changes. As of the 1.5 release,
they saw that 96% of the crates which compiled with 1.0 still compiled, which is a big deal for a language still being
developed this actively. In any case, keep your eyes out for those changes coming in March. I'll link the forum
announcement and the relevant RFCs in the show notes!

Now, let's talk some more about traits!

## Overview (1m -> 4m)

Last week, we talked about both generics and traits, but at a fairly high level. This week, we're going to build on
that by getting down into the nitty-gritty of what using generics and traits looks like in practice. There's not going
to be much test code in the show notes this week. Writing enough code to be meaningful for this would be, well... a
lot. Instead, I'm going to refer to the standard library docs, because they have a *ton* of generics and traits in
them. In fact, a lot of what might feel like core behavior of the language is actually just standard library
functionality, implemented in terms of generics and traits.

## `Iterator` (8m -> 12m)

Let's start by talking about the `Iterator` trait, which is a perfect example of something that provides enormous
functionality, but is just a trait---and, apart from the syntactic sugar that the compiler provides for using it, one
you could write yourself.

As an aside, if the main ways you've been working at learning Rust are through the Rust book, or Rust by Example, then
you should definitely start digging into the documentation proper. In many cases, the standard library documentation
includes not only definitions of the specific types and functions and methods defined in a given module, but also great
information beyond what you'd find in the more tutorial-like walkthrough in the books. Those tutorials, like the show
notes pages, link directly to the underlying source, as well, which is also extremely illuminating.

### `Iterator`

I'll quote from the `std::iter` module to start, in fact:

> The heart and soul of this module is the `Iterator` trait....
>
> An iterator has a method, `next()`, which when called, returns an `Option<Item>`. `next()` will return `Some(Item)`
> as long as there are elements, and once they've all been exhausted, will return `None` to indicate that iteration is
> finished. Individual iterators may choose to resume iteration, and so calling `next()` again may or may not
> eventually start returning `Some(Item)` again at some point.
>
> Iterators are also composable, and it's common to chain them together to do more complex forms of processing.

Let's break this down.

The module itself is built on the `Iterator` trait. There are about 3700 lines of code in this module, including all
the documentation, so that's a pretty substantial chunk of Rust's standard library dedicated to implementing and
explaining this one trait. As it turns out, though, that's really helpful as an example for people *learning* the
language: if core features of everyday Rust are built out of the underlying machinery this way, then we can come up
with our own, equally powerful abstractions if we need them.

(As an aside, this is exactly what's going on in things like the regex module, for example, which takes a number of
pieces of core functionality, including macros, and builds a very sophisticated library out of it. You can see the same
thing in any number of the other libraries out there.)

Back to the iterator module docs. The next thing we heard is a description of one of the basic methods available to
anything that implements the `Iterator` trait. All iterators have a `next()` method, and it returns an `Option`. If the
iterator still has items in it, it'll be `Some(item)`; otherwise, if you've exhausted the iterator, it'll be `None`.
This same behavior exists whether you're iterating over a vector, a string, a hash-map, a linked list, or quite
literally *any other* data type which implements `Iterator`.

Importantly, those types don't have to be "collection" types. To borrow a page from the *Rust by Example* book, for
example, you could implement a Fibonacci number generator in terms of `Iterator`, with `next()` always generating the
next value in the sequence. (Because it's an infinite sequence, you'd never return `None`, always `Some(integer)`).

Now, the `Iterator` trait also defines dozens---and I'm not exaggerating here, literally dozens---of other methods
besides `next()`. But as we discussed before, you can supply default implementations for trait methods, and that's
exactly what `Iterator` does.

A great many of Rust's facilities for functional-style programming appear in the `Iterator` trait, so if you want to be
using map or fold or any other such usual suspects from functional programming, `Iterator` is your source.

### Composition

Wrapping up that description, the last thing I quoted was the assertion that iterators are *composable*. This is
precisely why those functional patterns work so well: you can take one kind of iterable and create another one, and
another, and in each case you can use the *exact same operations* on the resulting iterable type. Why? Because all
iterable types have those methods defined on them---either from the defaults that `Iterator` itself supplies, or with a
custom definition which overrides those defaults.

So that's all great, but where it becomes really powerful is this: if you come up with your own custom data type, and
it makes sense to iterate over it, you can implement `Iterator` on it by supplying a `next()` method, and you'll get
all of that behavior for free. You can run `for` loops over your bespoke data type. For free.

Moreover, if you want to put multiple traits together, you can. You'll see this all over the Rust standard library, and
all over idiomatic Rust code in general. Defining a new type? There's a good chance you'll want to implement a bunch of
traits for it---`Add` to add things, `Drop` to define custom destructor behavior when the item goes out of scope,
equivalence via `PartialEq` or `Eq` depending on what kind of equivalence you have, ordering via `PartialOrd` or `Ord`
depending on what kind of ordering your set supports... you get the idea.

### `[derive()]`

I've skipped over this in previous episodes, but Rust also provides tools for implementing some of the more common
traits automatically. If you think back to our discussion of attributes in episode 7, you'll recall that I mentioned
being able to "derive" the `Debug` attribute. Well, what's actually going on there is that `Debug` is a trait, and the
Rust compiler is smart enough to know what a normal debug representation of many data types is, so we can get that for
free instead of going through the tedium of implementing that trait over, and over, and over again. In fact, *many*
built-in traits can be "derived" this way, which lets you create quite sophisticated behaviors around your custom types
without needing to do the heavy lifting yourself except for the places your type *differs* from the baseline.

In short, we get some really powerful abstractions, allowing us to create sophisticated behaviors around even complex
custom types, just by composing different traits together---but we're not paying a cost at runtime for it. It all comes
at compile-time. Neat!

## Syntax (4m -> 16m)

Let's talk about `trait` syntax for a minute. Precisely because composition of traits is the main way we define complex
types in Rust, the syntax is a bit less verbose than for interfaces in languages like Java or C#. Instead of an
`implements` keyword, we can simply include the name of the trait bounds we specify on a given generic immediately
after it. If we are generic over a type T which implements the *add* trait, we'd spell that `T: Add`.

We can also use the `where` clause to do this. You can think of `where` clauses as a way of spreading things out a
little so that your type signatures, especially for complicated functions, don't make your eyes explode. Instead of
annotating the generic bounds where they are defined, you can define them later. So you might define a generic type `T`
in your function definition, and at the end of the definition---after the arguments, but before the curly brace which
opens the function body---you would include `where T: Add`. This isn't a big deal where you only have one argument with
one trait applied, but it becomes quite useful if you have multiple arguments which have to conform to certain trait
constraints.

What about defining a new trait? It's about as you'd expect: you simply write `trait` followed by the name of the
trait, and then the usual curly-braces to mark off the body of the `trait`. If the body of the trait is empty, it's
what we call a *marker trait*. You can use these to say, "This can be used in a specific context" when that context
doesn't require given functions to be implemented. The Rust book gives the example of the `Send` trait, which indicates
that it is safe to send a given type between two threads. That doesn't require a function, but it *does* require you to
make sure that the type is memory-safe in certain ways!

## Limitations (1m -> 17m)

As powerful as all these tools are, Rust's traits can't do everything. And specifically, as of today you can't
implement the same trait in a more specific way if it makes sense for a given type if there's already a concrete
implementation in place. This is a serious blocker for some kinds of optimizations, and fixing it would lay the
groundwork for a Rustic approach to inheritance, which would be a nice addition to the language (even if we still think
composition is better in most cases). I'll link that RFC, as well as a helpful blog post by the RFC author, to the show
notes. That way you can take a look if you're interested in some of the language design issues and their ramifications
for you as a developer.

## Closing (2m 30s -> 19m 30s)

A little teaser for the future: you can actually act on what are called *trait objects*, where you provide a reference
to the name of a trait as shorthand for a reference to *some object which implements that trait*. When you do this, you
end up with *runtime* resolution, rather than *compile-time* resolution. In other words: dynamic dispatch. We'll leave
aside the details for now, but it's helpful to know it's out there. If you see a function returning a boxed up trait
you'll know what you're seeing.

There's also an open RFC to act on trait objects in general, which will further expand the utility of traits and of
generic programming in Rust in some neat ways.

Next time, we're going to talk about something that will sound awfully familiar but prove extremely unfamiliar to you
if you've spent a lot of time in C or C++: Rust's *macro* system.

### Sponsors

Thanks to Hamza Sheikh and Chris Palmer for sponsoring the show this month! Check out the list of other sponsors in the
show notes. You are all amazing; I really appreciate your support as I make the show. (So does my wife!)

If *you'd* like to sponsor the show, you can set up recurring donations at Patreon.com/newrustacean, or one-off
donations at Venmo, Dwolla, or cash.me.

### Follow/support

You can find show notes with detailed code samples illustrating these ideas, as well as links to things mentioned on
the show, at NewRustacean.com. You can also follow the show on Twitter @newrustacean, or follow me there @chriskrycho.
If you like the show, you'd make my week by rating it on iTunes, recommending it in another podcast directory, tweeting
about it, or just telling a friend!

Thanks to everyone who's added corrections and fixed typos in the show notes; pull requests are great. I also love
hearing from you! Definitely say hi on social media, add your thoughts in the thread for the episode on the Rust user
forum at users.rust-lang.org, or shoot me an email at hello@newrustacean.com.

Until next time, happy coding!
