# Macros rule!

## Intro (30s -> 0:30)

Hello, I'm Chris Krycho, and this is the New Rustacean podcast---a 15--20 minute show about learning the Rust
programming language. This is *Episode 10: Macros rule!*

## News (1m 30s -> 2:00)

A couple items of interest from around the Rust community:

- Julia Evans has a great set of slides titled "Why I (Heart) Rust" which was a ton of fun and has a really delightful
  art style to it. She also has a series of blog posts about writing a small operating system in Rust. Those posts were
  back in 2014, well before the language stabilized, so there are a bunch of things which have changed since then, but
  they're still quite interesting.
- Speaking of operating systems, Rust community coordinator Steve Klabnik has started a project call IntermezzOS, which
  a small teaching operating system built in Rust. It specifically focuses on (and I quote from the landing page),
  "introducing systems programming concepts to experienced developers from other areas of programming."

For my part I'm hoping to play with IntermezzOS here and there over the next few months, just because I'd like to learn
some of those pieces myself.

For today, though, let's talk about something totally different: macros!

## Overview of macros (2m -> 4:00)

So far, we have focused entirely on what I would call the more "normal" features of Rust. Even though there have been
some substantial differences between Rust and other languages you might know because of its type system, most of the
things we've done are still pretty familiar. Today's topic takes into a bit stranger territory, though. Today we're
talking about *macros*, which are Rust's way of providing ways of transforming your code apart from the usual suspects
of functions.

I said "transforming your code" because macros actually working on the abstract syntax tree that makes up the result of
the Rust compiler's first pass on the source you hand it. When you define macros, you actually *transform* that syntax
tree into a *different* syntax tree.

Rust has two kinds of macros today: the transformations we'll be dealing with today, which we might call *syntactic*
macros, and compiler plugins, often called *procedural* macros. There are also plans for dramatic improvements to the
syntactic macro system in the future, which I'll come back to and talk about a little bit at the end of the show.

There are two reasons I'm focusing on substitution macros today:

1. They're way easier to deal with, and I understand them *decently* well---at least well enough to use them a little
  here and there, and to explain them decently. I can't say the same for compiler plugins, which let you run arbitrary
  code in the compilation phase! That's still a bit beyond me.
2. They're *stable*. Compiler plugins presently only work in nightly Rust. The language development team *is*
  interested in making that functionality available to everyone... eventually. But they're still thinking about the
  best way to do that, and until they have a solution everyone is comfortable with, they're not going to stabilize it,
  precisely because of the guarantees Rust makes about stability.

So for now, we'll just stick with the simpler substitution macros, which are stable and a bit easier for regular Rust
developers to pick up and understand.

## Macros by Example (13m 30s -> 17:30)

### Discussion (4m 30s -> 8:30)

Properly speaking, we call these substitution macros "macros by example" after the paper which formulated them back in
the eighties; I'll link it in the show notes. Fair warning: it's heavy on parentheses, because it came out of Lisp, and
on math.

In any case, the macro's own body defines how the substitution behaves. Rust's macros are not running *arbitrary*
changes on the syntax tree; that's limited to the compiler plugin approach. Instead, they're a fairly sophisticated way
of doing *syntax substitutions*.

If you're familiar with preprocessor macros in C and C++, you can think of these macros-by-example as being like
those---only much more powerful *and* way safer.

Another important distinction: in C and C++, preprocessor macros are exactly what they sound like: *pre*-processing.
They transform the *text* in the source code, before any compilation occurs. And that's *all* they do in terms of
transformations: they substitute one set of text for another. In Rust, macros-by-example are instead an early part of
the compilation process proper, and they don't operate on *text*; they operate on the *abstract syntax tree*.

Another analogy would be to the text transformations you can accomplish with a sophisticated regular expression
engine---but again, operating on syntax instead of on text elements.

This difference---that they operate on the *abstract syntax tree* rather than on the strings in the source code, is the
reason that Rust's macros are so much more powerful and so much safer than C or C++'s.

You can perform macro substitutions on items, blocks, statements, patterns, expressions, types, identifiers, paths, the
sides of the fat-arrow operator (like the one used in `match` arms), and attribute contents, and of course you can mix
and match those as you like. The big takeaway here is that you're transforming an abstract representation of the
syntax. You can certainly write bugs in your macros, and because of how macro processing happens, they can be
non-trivial to chase down. But---and this is a big deal---you cannot do things like clobber local variable names!

One of the most common mistakes people make when writing macros in C or C++ is forgetting that it's just simple text
substitution. If you use "x" in your macro in C, and there's a local variable named "x" someplace where you use that
macro, those two things *are the same variable* when all is said and done, regardless of what you intended. There are
lots of ways people get around that---naming, wrapping things in blocks, etc.---but they all derive from the fact that
you can only transform the *text of the source code* there.

Since that's not what we're doing in Rust, and because the macros are implemented with the notion of "syntax context,"
we get a wonderful property called "hygiene." If you define what seems like it should be an ordinary local variable in
a Rust macro, it *is* a normal local variable; it doesn't clobber the names in use wherever the macro is applied. Thus,
you can *safely* use normal names, without worrying that you're accidentally shadowing and potentially blowing away the
values in some existing variable.

The combination of *syntactic substitution* with *hygiene* lets us write powerful, safe macros which can make for much
more readable code. Let's make this concrete by looking at some examples of macros in the Rust library, and then we can
look at what's involved in building your *own* macros.

### Some built-in macros (3m 30s -> 12:00)

Okay, so now we have some idea what we're talking about with macros, but how do we actually use them in Rust? And how
do we build our own?

Using macros is basically like using a function, with two significant differences. One, all of these macros have an
exclamation point after their name when you're using them. For example, the most common macro you'll run into is
probably the *try* macro, which you write `try!`.

And of course, if you've looked at almost any of the example code I supply with the different episodes, or with any
other Rust tutorials or documentation online, you've probably already seen a bunch of other common items: I've used the
`println!` macro heavily, and once we got into the test code I started using the `assert!` and `assert_eq!` macros,
which both make use of the `panic!` macro under the covers. So I'll offer some brief comments on each of these, as
they're among macros you'll see most often in Rust.

- The `try!` is used for dealing with `Result` types conveniently. Imagine a function where you want to do a bunch of
  file operations, each of which can fail, and which accordingly return `Result`s. Every time, you want to return a
  `Result` from your own function if there is an `Err`, and continue if the operation succeeded: you don't want to try
  to write to a file if you didn't get back a file pointer, for example.

  Instead of writing `match` expressions for every `Result` in the function, you can just wrap them with `try!`, which
  does exactly that---but makes your own code way easier to read. (Note: you can't use the regular `try!` in `main()`
  because `main()` doesn't return a `Result`. But one of the example in the show notes this week is a version of `try!`
  which works in `main()`!)

- The `print!`, `println!`, `write!`, `writeln!`, and `format!` are convenient wrappers around string formatting and
  printing or writing to buffers. `format!` is used by all the others to supply string formatting like you'd see in C's
  `printf` or Python's `str.format`. The *print* and *write* macros provide convenient ways to call the `std::io`
  module's functions for printing and writing to buffers, with format operations applied first.

- The `assert!` and `assert_eq!` macros are usually used for testing; they let you test general boolean expressions and
  equality of values respectively. If they fail, they use the `panic!` macro internally.

- The `panic!` macro is for unrecoverable, unexpected errors. You can think of it *kind of* like an exception you
  *can't* catch in another language. It causes a thread panic, which unravels the stack and dumps it to stderr. You
  shouldn't see these very often, but they are appropriate from time to time.

### `macro_rules!` (2m -> 14:00)

What about *writing* macros?

You create a new macro with (wait for it)... a macro! The macro-by-example macro-creation macro is called
`macro_rules`. You write it like any other macro: "macro-underscore-rules-exclamation-point". It is used as a
standalone item, rather than in the midst of a function or expression like those discussed above. (Of course, other
macros can be written that way as well, and it may make good sense to do so, depending on the kind of macro you're
writing.)

So for example, in the show notes for this episode, I defined two macros so you can see how they work. One is them is
the variation on `try!` that works in `main()` functions which I mentioned earlier. The other example macro I wrote
takes any identifier---a variable, a function, a type, etc.---and prints a little message including its name. That
second macro shows how macros can use other macros, and in fact you can have recursive macro usage. (Good luck
debugging those, though! It's possible, but it's a lot of work.)

I actually came up with the idea for that `main_try!` when helping a friend get going with Rust a few months ago, and
discovered that it's not hard to write some simple macros in Rust. I ended up needing to write a similar shortcut in
some C++ I was working a few weeks later, and let me just say: it's definitely easier to write a macro without shooting
yourself in the foot in Rust than in C or C++.

### Downsides (1m 30s -> 15:30)

It isn't all sunshine and roses, though. Macros are powerful, but they are a secondary tool, not the first thing you
should reach for. As the Rust book says:

> The drawback is that macro-based code can be harder to understand, because fewer of the built-in rules apply. Like an
> ordinary function, a well-behaved macro can be used without understanding its implementation. However, it can be
> difficult to design a well-behaved macro! Additionally, compiler errors in macro code are harder to interpret,
> because they describe problems in the expanded code, not the source-level form that developers use.
>
> These drawbacks make macros something of a "feature of last resort". That’s not to say that macros are bad; they are
> part of Rust because sometimes they’re needed for truly concise, well-abstracted code. Just keep this tradeoff in
> mind.

In general, you should use the more standard language machinery: functions, types, and traits. When you need them,
though, macros are around, and they're pretty great.

### Limitations and upcoming changes (2m -> 17:30)

There are a few things that macros can't do, or can't do well, even with everything we talked about above. First, you
can't use a macro in arbitrary locations in code. You can't use them as the field in a struct, or as a trait item, for
example, because of how the compiler parsing sequence unfolds. Another limit is that hygiene---that nice property that
means we don't stomp all over existing names, etc.---isn't fully fleshed out. It's better than in C or C++ by a mile,
but it doesn't apply to types, or lifetimes, so it still has some places where it can throw a wrench into things.

There are also some quirks around macro names, because they don't get the same namespace treatment that normal types,
etc. do. (You can actually see this in play in the show notes, where they don't end up in the module for this episode,
but in the crate at the top level.) And, annoyingly and unlike the rest of Rust, the order you define them in matters!
You can get around a lot of these issues to varying degrees, but the limitations are still frustrating.

For a much more detailed discussion of these issues, you should see Nick Cameron's series of blog posts on macros,
which I'll link in the show notes. You can also read about some of his plans for a proposed new, better approach for
macros that would stabilize the procedural macros we skipped over today, as well as fixing a bunch of these issues
along the way.

## Closing (2m -> 19:30)

A quick heads-up: this coming week, I'll be traveling to start a new job, and probably won't have a lot of extra time,
so you can expect either a bonus episode or no episode next week. I have a short episode I'd *like* to do, and which
I'm hoping I'll be able to knock out next weekend after I get back, but it depends on just how wiped out I am after
traveling!

### Sponsors

Thanks to Hamza Sheikh and Chris Palmer for sponsoring the show this month! You can see a full list of sponsors in the
show notes.

If *you'd* like to sponsor the show, you can set up recurring contributions at Patreon.com/newrustacean, or one-off
contributions at Venmo, Dwolla, or cash.me.

### Follow/support

You can find links to each of those, to other things mentioned on the show, and notes and detailed code samples
illustrating macros at NewRustacean.com. You can also follow the show on Twitter @newrustacean, or follow me there
@chriskrycho. You can help *others* find the show by rating and reviewing it on iTunes, recommending it in another
podcast directory, tweeting about it, or just telling a friend!

Thanks to everyone who's added corrections and fixed typos in the show notes; pull requests are great. I also love
hearing from you! Definitely say hi on social media, add your thoughts in the thread for the episode on the Rust user
forum at users.rust-lang.org, or shoot me an email at hello@newrustacean.com.

Until next time, happy coding!
